---
layout: post
title: I don't want to be "That Girl"
---

This is a difficult post for me to write. When I started coding a year and a
half ago, I have to admit that I didn't really know what I was getting myself
into. I knew that software development was a cognitively intensive field, which
is what initially drew me to it, but I didn't know that it would be the
community that would make me grow to have a truly vested, emotional interest in
increasing diversity in this field.

I've been involved with organising [codebar](https://codebar.io) for the last
year or so. At first, I think I became involved with codebar because
I was feeling bored and untethered, just starting out in an entirely new career
field. I'm someone who draws energy from being involved in thirty different
things at the same time -- ask anyone that I went to university with! When I
started helping out with codebar, I admit I didn't *really* think that
diversity in tech was such a huge issue, particularly in London. In my limited
experience at the time, I felt that the London tech scene was pretty great.
People came from all over Europe thanks to open borders, and I never had the
sense that there was a hyper-masculine, "tech bro" culture in the UK. I knew
that some of my friends who are women who work in tech in the US had mixed
experiences with their first forays into tech, and I was grateful that I wasn't
dealing with overt misogyny and sexism in my work experiences and job-hunting
processes.

I was wrong to think that the tech industry in London was somehow unique or
insulated from the same underlying attitudes and assumptions that my friends
stateside experienced.

From inflammatory emails and tweets directed to the official codebar accounts
to awkward questions about "cultural fit" asked during job interviews to
off-hand remarks made by colleagues (in perfectly good faith) that were
gendered in ways that they didn't realise, I've learnt firsthand over my first
year working professionally in tech that my outward gender has defined or influenced a
LOT of my interactions, and probably will continue to do so for the foreseeable
future.

I finally got around to watching "Debugging the Gender Gap", a documentary
about the lack of diversity in tech and what companies and individuals can do
about it. A huge thank you to [Jo](https://twitter.com/ThisIsJoFrank) for
organising the event, part of Achieving Diversity in Tech, a new initiative at
Ticketmaster UK.

Julie Ann Horvath's comments in the film really struck a chord with me. I'm not
going to comment too much on her specific experiences at Github, but one thing
that really resonated with me was that she, like SO MANY other women including
myself, initially resisted saying anything about the sexist treatment she was
subjected to because she didn't want to be a whistleblower. She didn't want to
be "that girl".

I brought this up during the Q&A that followed the film, and it turned out that
a lot of women in the audience felt the same way at least once. There have been
multiple times when I've been in a situation where one or more men made a
comment or joke that I didn't "get" the humor of, or would ask me questions
that made me an unwilling representative of all women -- things that I knew I
was either excluded or singled out for on the basis of being female. In almost
all circumstances, I felt slightly irked but never annoyed enough to raise a
formal complaint or even call somebody out in the moment. After all, I also
didn't want to be "that girl".

But that's the problem, isn't it? From what I understand, comments like these
qualify as "microaggressions". Most people probably don't even realise when
they've made a gendered comment. I like to give people the benefit of the
doubt, and I *especially* don't like to alienate people that I know I'll be
working with everyday, so for those two reasons it's going to take a very, very
overt transgression to get me to actually say something direct. On further
reflection, I think girls are more likely to think this way, because women are
socialised to constantly think about the room that we take up and what we can
do to please the people around us better.

I studied economics in university. I've forgotten a shamefully large amount of
it, but one thing I do remember is diminishing marginal cost. If you are making
£100K a year, it's less painful for you to lose £100 than it is for someone
who only makes £25K a year because the marginal cost is different. In
professional environments, political capital is distributed unequally across
employees. Some people come in with more (maybe they were friends with the CTO
from a previous role) and some people come in with less (maybe they're an
untested junior developer and this is their first role). You can use political
capital for lots of things -- advocating for communal benefits such as conference
budgets or hack days, getting your friend a recommendation to work at your
company, or gunning for a promotion or pay rise for yourself. I think it's a
pretty safe assumption to say that both male and female employees would prefer
to dedicate most of their political capital towards career advancement whenever
possible. A key difference is that most straight-cisgender-male engineers will never have to
expend any political capital to push for fair treatment in the workplace or to
get their bosses to notice subconscious biases. So, even in an ideal world
where a male and female junior-level employee begin with the same amount of
political cred, a woman in that position may have to consider the impact to her
career advancement odds if she "spends" some of that capital on things like
pointing out sexism in the workplace and trying to address it. The marginal
cost is higher, so we're pretty meaningfully deterred from making noise when we
don't think that the gamble will pay off in our favor. Privilege means not having 
to think about it in the first place.

I'm not really sure where this leaves me. I guess that's why I was so hesitant
to blog about this for such a long time. I think, at the least, it leaves me
with a great deal of cognitive dissonance: I want to think that I'm someone who
takes action; on the other hand, there are a lot of
things preventing me from being outspoken about the whole range of biased
treatment, from microaggressions all the way up to overt discrimination. I'm
not sure what I'm going to do next, but I think that being honest and candid is
a step in the right direction.
